Notes from general and disease specific (obesity and CVD) papers:

GWAS have led to the id of >1200 loci with genetic variants related  to >165 common human diseases and traits.These studies have uncovered many statistically correlative biological pathways whose functional roles are unknown at present. Only a small proportion of heritability of the traits, as derived from twin, adoption, and family studies,  has been explained from the GWAS studies so far (only in a few, >50%, but in most <10%). Larger GWAS studies with lower MAFs are deemed necessary to find the 'tail end' of these loci set that would explain this missing heritability. Zuk et al. hypothesize that epistasis (gene to gene interactions) might explain the additional heritability seen in population (twin, adoption, and family) studies. Not sure whey they are called 'population' studies, for they are really studies of exclusive subgroups. There is an implicit assumption (my interpretation; but they mention rate limiting effects - so, same) in their hypothesis that these interactions would occur only when genes are expressed at high levels, thus perhaps leading to competititive inhibition (at the recptor level), interference (due to physical proximity), and consequent missed regulatory effects. Such interactions would not occur when expression levels are lower, avoiding such 'cross-talk' (engineering term). They call this 'phantom' heritability. In math terms, *π<sub>explained</sub> = (h<sup>2</sup><sub>known</sub>)/(h<sup>2</sup><sub>all</sub>)*, where LHS is heritability explained, with the RHS numerator representing the additvie effects of phenotypic variance due to the known genetic loci (and variants therein), and the RHS denominator representing the phenotypic variance attributable to the additive effects of all variants, known and unknown. The latter is estimated indirectly from population studies. *If my inference is right, as seems to be implied, then population studies must have strong epistasis components. Is the implication that there are no genomic databases for such exclusive groups?*. Zuk et al., contend that the denominator is overestimated due to this. To describe this rate-limiting effect, they introduce 'limiting Pathway (LP)' model: A trait depends on the rate-limiting value of *k* inputs, each of which is a strictly additive trait that depends on a set of variants (common or rare). When K=1, the LP model is the standard additive trait. For K>1, they show that *LP(k)* traits can have substantial phantom variability. 

Example: Crohn's disease - had 71 loci ided in 2012. Under the additive model, they explained only 21.5% of the estimated heritability. But if *LP(3)* nmodels is used, the phantom heritability is 62.8%, thus explained heritability would now be 80%. To determine epistasis, one could look at 'population' data (such as phenotypic correlations among close relative) or genetic data (such as pairwise tests of epistasis). **They show that this task may be difficult**. For the case of Crohn's disease above, this may require sample sizes > 0.5 M. *This is understandable - since n has to be large to get highly significant correlation coefficients, and that is difficult in such exclusive groups. But, current data may still be interpretable (my view)...*. *More importantly, it may be possible in studies of people with obesity, advanced degrees of common diseases (my view), with potential for larger n*. 

**Results**: \
**Quantitative and Disease Traits**: Quantitative Traits P depend on genotype G and environment E as per *P = Ψ(G,E)*. Here *G = (g<sub>1</sub>, g<sub>1</sub>, g<sub>2</sub>,.... g<sub>n</sub>)* is the genotype with variants as sites 1 thru n. *g<sub>i</sub>* is the number of copies (0,1,2) of an allele at the ith site, and *f<sub>i</sub>* is the frequency of the designated allele. All variant sites are assumed to be in linkage equilibrium -- *that is, unique??*. E may involve both a shared or unique environment.  Disease traits are given by thresholding P. 

**Broad-sense (H<sub>2</sub>) vs narrow-sense heritability (h<sub>2</sub>)**: Authors use the word 'narrow' in a different way (opposite of my 'exclusive') - that it is a purely additive model if 'narrow.' That is what geneticists are using to calculate the contribution of individual loci to heritability.  

** Explained, Missing, and Phantom Heritability**: Genticists use a "bottom-up' approach to estimate the numerator (see equation above) and a "top-down" approach to estimate the denominator. The numerator will get more precise as lower MAFs are addressed with larger studies. The denonminator is estimated from 'population' or 'exclusive group'  studies (phenotyping correlations in a population), *h<sup>2</sup><sub>pop</sub>*. It is called 'apparent heritability' in the paper. G-G and G-E interactions are ignored in additive models. If considered, *h<sup>2</sup><sub>all</sub>*  may be less than *h<sup>2</sup><sub>pop</sub>*. 




References:
* Zuk, O., et al., The mystery of missing heritability: Genetic interactions create phantom heritability, PNAS, Jan 24, 2012, pp. 1193-1198
* Obesity and Genomics book
* ECM and Biomaterials book
