Obesity is a complex disease, similar to cardiovascular, diabetic, and renal diseaases, in the sense that it is polygnic and genomic. Not all of the heredity is explained by the genes identified so far. It appears more research has been conducted in this area, perhaps because of the commercialization potential; much can be learned from here and adapted for other other diseases. 

Notes from "The Genetics of Obesity" by S.F.A. Grant , 2014, Springer, to be included here. I have handwritten notes to be typed in here for most of the chapters. 

I am directly entering notes from Chapter 7 here. Title: Functional Follow-Up of Genetic Variants using FTO as the Prime Example. Authors: S. Seehaus and U. Ruther, pp. 127

Summary: Obesity is the result of lifestyle and genetic factors. Tens of genes/ loci have been associated with obesity . *FTO* has shown the highest effect on body weight, the first found from GWAS studies, not uncovered earlier by single-gene functional genomics studies. This has been a highly active area of research over the past decade. *FTO*  is likely to act as a RNA demythelase, the biological pathway to higher body weight is not known. 

In mice, *Fto* was identified in 1999. It is one of the 6 genes affected by 'Fused toes' (*Ft*) mutation. Mice heterozygous for this 1.6 Mb deletion show forelimbs with fused toes and high thymic hyperplasia, likely caused through impaired apoptosis. Homozygous *Ft/Ft* embryos died between embryonic day 10.5 and 12.5 due to severe developmental malformation. *Fto* encodes a protein of 502 AA, 58 kDa, dissimilar to other known proteins. It is a large gene of 9 exons present in all vertebrates, and even in marine algae. When GWAS studies began, *FTO* was found to be correlated with BMI increase. Homozygous carriers weighed 3 Kg more and had a 1.67-fold higher risk for obesity. Most SNPs in the first intron are implicated. 

GWAS only indicate a loci and not a specific gene. Other possible genes in the loci are *RPGRIP1L*, which has a role in embryonic development. *Ex vivo* and in vitro analyses  (of subcutaneous fat of lean and obese women) showed *FTO* expression (but not *RPGRIP1L*) correlated positively with BMI. Both were downregulated with progression in adipocyte differentiation. *CUX1* may be a regulator of these two genes. Evidence is not strong. Current understanding also rules out RPGRIP1L.

FTO Expression profile in relation to nutritional states: Fto/FTO expression has been confirmed in the nucleus of various cell types and tissues. Highest levels are found in the brain, in hypothalamus and cerebellum. There is focus on FTO's role in regulating energy metabolism. Experiments altering nutritional states have limitations in controlling all the environmental conditions and  delivered mixed results. On the genetic side, FOXA2 seems to bind to the promoter of *FTO*, reducing the expression level of *FTO*. 

Functional studies in vitro: 

*Demythlase FTO*: *In silico* analysis ("performed on computer or via computer simulation") suggests *FTO* to be a member of the superfamily of non-heme dioxygenases. These are involved in posttranslational modifications, DNA repair and histone modifications, and act as cellular sensors for metabolism and oxygen. FTO seemed to demethylate 3-methylthymine in the ssDNA (single strand DNA) setting. It matched with parallel development that it may act as a RNA demethylase. This was verified with recombinant human and mouse FTO. FTO functioning as a DNA demethylase is unlikely.

The N terminus of FTO (32-326 AA) shows high sequence similarity t alkB and mammalian homologues, the C-terminal domain (327-498 AAs) shows no sequence similarity to any gene. N terminus is the catalytic domain (the extra loop prevents DNA activity). 

N6-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is another substrate for FTO in ssRNA. It is an abundant modification in mRNA.  In vitro, this methyltransferase complex preferentially methylates RNA oligonucleotides containing GGACU (from [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N6-Methyladenosine)). Overexpression of FTO led to decreased quantity of 
m<sup>6</sup>A in mRNA, whereas 90% knockdown of FTO led to an increase. This raised questions about m<sup>6</sup>A's role in biological processes. Mapping m<sup>6</sup>A has given ther human m<sup>6</sup>A RNA methylomes. 18,000 m6A sites in the transcripts of more than 7,000 human genes with a consensus sequence of [G/A/U] have been identified in human RNA. A group of RNA binding proteins ('m<sup>6</sup>a readers') specifically recognize the methylated adenosine on RNA.  Together with m6A methyltransferases (writers) and demethylases (erasers), these readers establish a complex mechanism of m<sup>6</sup>A regulation. Also, m<sup>6</sup>A modifications appear to be **dynamically and reversibly regulated**. Further studies with FTO and ALKBH5 will bring clarity to the issue. 

*Role of FTO in Amino Acid Sensing*: Essential AA-deprived human and mouse lines show FTO downregulation (mRNA and protein levels). Note:  *Essential AA* cannot be synthesized by the organism, and is to be supplied in its diet. They are phenylalanine, valine, threonine, tryptophan, methionine, leucine, isoleucine, lysine, and histidine (i.e., F V T W M L I K H). Also, *Fto*-deficient mouse fibroblasts and human HEK cells show decreased cell growth, impaired mRNA translation, autophagy,etc.  This defines a role for FTO in mammalian target of **rapamycin (mTORC1) signaling**, as an important protein complex for containing *food intake*. 

*Loss- and Gain- of-function-analyses of Fto in Mice and Rats*: *Fto*-deficient mice were protected from obesity, with reduced body weight and icnreased energy expenditure (although exhibiting hyperphagia and reduced spontaneous locomotor activity). MRI showed a lower fat and lean mass. Serum adiponectin increased and leptin decreased, markers for body weight regulation. The mice failed to gain weight even with high fat diet, and had growth retarded with more postnatal death. This led to: *FTO is involved in weigth regulation and energy homeostasis*. A dose-dependent effect with the highest increase in body mass was confirmed in mice with four *Fto*-copies. Food intake and energy expenditure increased, with no change in physical activity or circadian rhythm. Other types of mutations have been tried. Interpretation of these results is extremely complicated and challenging. "The role of FTO is still unclear, especially after the report that an adult onset loss of FTO led to a gain in fat mass." 

*Analysis of individuals carrying genetic variants of FTO*: Association between *FTO* variants and increased BMI and body weight were clearly identified. However, whether increased, decreased, or deregulated FTO expression drives this is unclear. Most researchers have focused on the link between *FTO* risk allele carriers and *FTO* expression levels in adipose tissue. Results: No association was found (inconsistent, confusing results). At the RNA level, risk allelic expression of *FTO* was found be more abundant than non-risk allele expression. *This suggests that FTO overexpression may lead to an increase in body weight*. In another study, nine exons of *FTO* in 2866 individuals were screened for heterozygous non-synonymous variants. They were equally likely between lean and obese prople. Loss of funtion mulations of *FTO* were found in lean and obest people. *This showed clearly that non-synonymous variants in the coding region of FTO, and therefore of the protein, are not linked to obesity*. (From an online source: A nonsynonymous substitution is a nucleotide mutation that alters the amino acid sequence of a protein. Synonymous substitution do not alter amino acid sequences. As nonsynonymous substitutions result in a biological change in the organism, they are subject to natural selection). 

*FTO as a therapeutic target for obesity*: FTO seems to function as a demethylase. An effective cell-active inhibitor for FTO called rhein has been tried. It binds to FTO reversibly, thus blocking the recognition site of FTO for m<sup>67</sup> substrate sites. *However, this is currently risky. Elucidation of FTO's role is crucial in designing a tissue or signaling pathway-specific drug for FTO targeting*.

Concluding comments: It is unclear whether the demethylase activity of FTO is responsible for the effects seen in mutant mice. If it is responsible, what are the targets of FTO and are these targets organ specific? Which of these targets, out of the high number of demethylated targets, are relevant to obesity? Authors conclude thus: At the end of the day, independent of our genetic status, do not eat more than your body burns; otherwise you will gain weight. 

